Create "PolkaVM Design" page in SC basics section (#360)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: polkadot-protocol/smart-contracts-basics/polkavm-design.md

## PolkaVM

[**PolkaVM**](https://github.com/paritytech/polkavm){target=\_blank} is a custom virtual machine optimized for performance with [RISC-V-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RISC-V){target=\_blank} architecture, supporting Solidity and additional high-performance languages. It serves as the core execution environment, integrated directly within the runtime. It features:

- An efficient interpreter for immediate code execution
- A planned JIT compiler for optimized performance
- Dual-mode execution capability, allowing selection of the most appropriate backend for specific workloads
- Optimized performance for short-running contract calls through the interpreter

The interpreter remains particularly beneficial for contracts with minimal code execution, as it eliminates JIT compilation overhead and enables immediate code execution through lazy interpretation.

### Architecture

PolkaVM introduces two fundamental architectural differences compared to the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM):

> - **Register-Based design** - unlike EVM's stack-based architecture, PolkaVM utilizes a RISC-V register-based approach. This design:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Register-based design** - unlike EVM's stack-based architecture, PolkaVM utilizes a RISC-V register-based approach. This design:
```

    - Employs a finite set of registers for argument passing instead of an infinite stack
    - Facilitates efficient translation to underlying hardware architectures
    - Optimizes register allocation through careful register count selection
    - Enables simple 1:1 mapping to x86-64 instruction sets
    - Reduces compilation complexity through strategic register limitation
    - Improves overall execution performance through hardware-aligned design

> - **64-Bit word size**  - PolkaVM operates with a 64-bit word size, contrasting with EVM's 256-bit architecture:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **64-bit word size**  - PolkaVM operates with a 64-bit word size, which differs from EVM's 256-bit architecture as follows:
```

    - Enables direct hardware-supported arithmetic operations
    - Maintains compatibility with Solidity's 256-bit operations through YUL translation
    - Allows integration of performance-critical components written in lower-level languages
    - Optimizes computation-intensive operations through native word size alignment
    - Reduces overhead for operations not requiring extended precision
    - Facilitates efficient integration with modern CPU architectures

## Pallet Revive

[**`pallet_revive`**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_revive/index.html){target=\_blank} is a runtime module that executes smart contracts by adding extrinsics, runtime APIs, and logic to convert Ethereum-style transactions into formats compatible with Polkadot SDK-based blockchains. It processes Ethereum-style transactions through the following workflow:

> - Users interact with a proxy server that emulates the Ethereum JSON RPC interface

Reviewer: Please make this a numbered list since the items happen in a set order. Thank you!

- The proxy server transforms Ethereum transactions into special dispatchable transactions while preserving the original payload
- The pallet's internal logic decodes and processes these transactions for blockchain compatibility

This proxy-based approach eliminates the need for node binary modifications, maintaining compatibility across different client implementations. Preserving the original Ethereum transaction payload simplifies adapting existing tools, which can continue processing familiar transaction formats.

## Revive Compiler

[**Revive**](https://github.com/paritytech/revive){target=\_blank} enables Solidity execution on PolkaVM through a particular compilation pipeline:

- Utilizes the standard Solidity compiler (solc) as its foundation
- Converts Solidity's [YUL](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html){target=\_blank} intermediate representation to RISC-V instructions
- Maintains complete compatibility with all Solidity versions and features

> - Simplifies implementation by focusing on YUL transformation rather than full compiler development

Reviewer: Is there anything we can put down here for Where to Go Next?

Author: Hmm, I'm a little uncertain about that. In this section on the `Polkadot Protocol`, we’re not following the usual practice of adding a `Where to Go Next` at the end (take a look at the pages in the `parachain-basics`).  

Since the only content available for the smart contracts pages comes from https://contracts.polkadot.io/, which will be deprecated once we launch this documentation, it seems like there aren't many extra resources to include here

---
title: Smart Contracts Basics
description: Discover PolkaVM, a high-performance smart contract VM for Polkadot, enabling Ethereum compatibility via pallet_revive, Solidity support, and optimized execution.
---

# PolkaVM Design

## Introduction

The smart contract solution comprises several key components designed to deliver high performance and Ethereum compatibility. This architecture enables integration with existing Ethereum tools while providing enhanced performance characteristics through its innovative virtual machine design.

## Pallet Revive

> [**`pallet_revive`**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_revive/index.html){target=\_blank} is a runtime module that executes smart contracts by adding extrinsics, runtime APIs, and logic to convert Ethereum-style transactions into formats compatible with the blockchain. It processes Ethereum-style transactions through the following workflow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**`pallet_revive`**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_revive/index.html){target=\_blank} is a runtime module that executes smart contracts by adding extrinsics, runtime APIs, and logic to convert Ethereum-style transactions into formats compatible with Polkadot SDK-based blockchains. It processes Ethereum-style transactions through the following workflow:
```

- **Register-Based design** - unlike EVM's stack-based architecture, PolkaVM utilizes a RISC-V register-based approach. This design:

    - Employs a finite set of registers for argument passing instead of an infinite stack
    - Facilitates efficient translation to underlying hardware architectures
    - Optimizes register allocation through careful register count selection
    - Enables simple 1:1 mapping to x86-64 instruction sets
    - Reduces compilation complexity through strategic register limitation
    - Improves overall execution performance through hardware-aligned design

- **64-Bit word size**  - PolkaVM operates with a 64-bit word size, contrasting with EVM's 256-bit architecture:

    - Enables direct hardware-supported arithmetic operations
    - Maintains compatibility with Solidity's 256-bit operations through YUL translation
    - Allows integration of performance-critical components written in lower-level languages
    - Optimizes computation-intensive operations through native word size alignment
    - Reduces overhead for operations not requiring extended precision
    - Facilitates efficient integration with modern CPU architectures

> ## Revive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Revive Compiler
```

[**Revive**](https://github.com/paritytech/revive){target=\_blank} enables Solidity execution on PolkaVM through a particular compilation pipeline:

- Utilizes the standard Solidity compiler (solc) as its foundation
- Converts Solidity's [YUL](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html){target=\_blank} intermediate representation to RISC-V instructions
- Maintains complete compatibility with all Solidity versions and features
- Simplifies implementation by focusing on YUL transformation rather than full compiler development

> ## Revive Remix

Reviewer 2: I don't think Remix should be explained here as it is not part of the core protocol. This should be somewhere in develop

---
title: PolkaVM Design

> description: Discover PolkaVM, a high-performance smart contract VM for Polkadot, enabling Ethereum compatibility via pallet_revive, Solidity support, and optimized execution.

Author: Thanks @0xlukem ! Why did you remove the `description:` keyword? I believe it is necessary.

> description: Discover PolkaVM, a high-performance smart contract VM for Polkadot, enabling Ethereum compatibility via pallet_revive, Solidity support, and optimized execution.

Author: And I think the period should stay at the end of the sentence

> description: Discover PolkaVM, a high-performance smart contract VM for Polkadot, enabling Ethereum compatibility via pallet_revive, Solidity support, and optimized execution.

Reviewer: Yes on both points.

> description: Discover PolkaVM, a high-performance smart contract VM for Polkadot, enabling Ethereum compatibility via pallet_revive, Solidity support, and optimized execution.

Author: Okay, so it should be fixed in [ad9410b](https://github.com/polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs/pull/360/commits/ad9410b3e95aaf7e79010cebe0406b946872f3b5), could you please check it?

- **Register-based design** - unlike EVM's stack-based architecture, PolkaVM utilizes a RISC-V register-based approach. This design:

    - Employs a finite set of registers for argument passing instead of an infinite stack
    - Facilitates efficient translation to underlying hardware architectures
    - Optimizes register allocation through careful register count selection
    - Enables simple 1:1 mapping to x86-64 instruction sets
    - Reduces compilation complexity through strategic register limitation
    - Improves overall execution performance through hardware-aligned design

- **64-bit word size**  - PolkaVM operates with a 64-bit word size, which differs from EVM's 256-bit architecture as follows:

    - Enables direct hardware-supported arithmetic operations
    - Maintains compatibility with Solidity's 256-bit operations through YUL translation
    - Allows integration of performance-critical components written in lower-level languages
    - Optimizes computation-intensive operations through native word size alignment
    - Reduces overhead for operations not requiring extended precision

>     - Facilitates efficient integration with modern CPU architectures

Reviewer 3: This kinda overlaps with the polkavm vs evm page. So maybe refocus this section to talk specifically about the PolkaVM architecture and link to the relevant section in the other page

Author: Mmm I don't think it necessarily overlaps with evm vs polkavm, but I do believe it might be not very clear to add statements like:
- "unlike EVM's stack-based architecture"
- "which differs from EVM's 256-bit architecture"

I'll remove those sentences, but I think the rest is very intrinsic to PolkaVM and its design. Would you agree?

Author: Updated in [2cfe9c6](https://github.com/polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs/pull/360/commits/2cfe9c60a2966ad7d9abddfc67bd9e1ac2576f82)

Reviewer 3: Looks good. Thanks!
